Update LIP 0047 with genesis block processing (#119)
LiskHQ/lips: proposals/lip-0047.md

Let `trs` be a transaction with module ID `MODULE_ID_POA` and command ID `COMMAND_ID_REGISTRATION_AUTHORITY` to be verified. The list of verification conditions for `trs.params` is as follows:

* The `trs.params.name` property has to contain only characters from the set `[a-z0-9!@$&_.]`, must not be empty and has to be at most `MAX_LENGTH_NAME` characters long.

> * The `trs.params.name` property has to be unique with respect to the set of already registered authority names in the blockchain state, such that the entry with store prefix equal to `STORE_PREFIX_NAME` and store key equal to `trs.params.name` (serialized as a utf-8 encoded string) does not exist in the store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `trs.params.name` property has to be unique with respect to the set of already registered authority names in the blockchain state, i.e. the entry with store prefix equal to `STORE_PREFIX_NAME` and store key equal to `trs.params.name` (serialized as a utf-8 encoded string) does not exist in the store.
```

Author: updated

This module does not define any endpoint for off-chain services.

### Genesis Block Processing

> The following two steps are executed as part of the genesis block processing, see the “Update genesis block schema and processing” LIP for details. 

Author: yes, hopefully, it will be merged in the next days.

> The following two steps are executed as part of the genesis block processing, see the “Update genesis block schema and processing” LIP for details. 

Reviewer 2: ok. I'll suggest to keep this comment open then and wait until the other PR is merged. Do you agree?

> The following two steps are executed as part of the genesis block processing, see the “Update genesis block schema and processing” LIP for details. 

Author: link to LIP 0060 has been added

#### Genesis State Initialization

To initialize the state of a genesis block `g`, the following logic is executed. If any step fails, the block is discarded and has no further effect.

> Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the bytes included in the block assets for the PoA module and let `genesisBlockAssetObject` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisPoAStoreSchema` schema, given below, then: 

Reviewer: Consider using a short variable name such as `genesisAsset` or `assetPoA` instead of `genesisBlockAssetObject` for better readability and compactness below.

> Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the bytes included in the block assets for the PoA module and let `genesisBlockAssetObject` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisPoAStoreSchema` schema, given below, then: 

Author: Added a correct formulation for the deserialization of the assets as Andreas suggested
Also, shortened `genesisBlockAssetObject` to `assetPoA` as Jan suggested

> Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the bytes included in the block assets for the PoA module and let `genesisBlockAssetObject` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisPoAStoreSchema` schema, given below, then: 

Reviewer 2: can be resolved

> Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the bytes included in the block assets for the PoA module and let `genesisBlockAssetObject` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisPoAStoreSchema` schema, given below, then: 

Reviewer: Can be resolved.

> * Checks for the `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore`: 

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be easier here and also better encourage code re-use to write:
For each entry in `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore` perform the verification and execution logic of the authority registration command with the same parameters as input and `address` being the address of the sender account. Only the last step in the execution, callling `registerValidatorKeys`, is not done here as API calls should only be done in the genesis state finalization.

Author: I added a clarification sentence in this direction. This way we have the point of re-use, the strictly correct specs for the genesis and I don't need to revert changes  that are actually correct.

  * Check that the `address` property of every entry `validator` in the `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators` array is distinct pairwise.
  * Check that the `name` property of every entry `validator` in the `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators` array contains only characters from the set `[a-z0-9!@$&_.]`, is not empty and is at most `MAX_LENGTH_NAME` characters long.
  * Check that the `generatorKey` property of every entry `validator` in the `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators` array has length 32.
  * Check that the `blsKey` property of every entry `validator` in the `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators` array has length 48.
  * Check that the `proofOfPossession` property of every entry `validator` in the `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators` array has length 96.

> * Checks for the `genesisBlockAssetObject.snapshotSubstore`: 

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be easier here and also better encourage code re-use to reference the same validation logic already described above:
- For `genesisBlockAssetObject.snapshotSubstore.activeValidators` apply the same verifications as for `trs.params.newValidators` in the update authority command verification.
- For `genesisBlockAssetObject.snapshotSubstore.threshold` apply the same verifications as for `trs.params.threshold` in the update authority command verification.

Author: I think in this case it is a bit dangerous to refer to that logic since for the update authority command verification the entries in the validator substore already exist and we do not need to check for uniqueness etc.

Reviewer: Okay, can be resolved.

     * Minimum value: ⌊ ⅓ × `totalWeight`⌋ + 1
     * Maximum value: `totalWeight`

    where ⌊⋅⌋ is the floor function.

* Create an entry in the validator substore for each entry `validator` in the `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators` array as:
  * `storeKey`: `validator.address`.
  * The `storeValue` is the serialization of the object `validatorObject` following `validatorObjectSchema` with `validatorObject.name = validator.name`. 	

* Create an entry in the name substore for each entry `validator` in the `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators` array as:
  * `storeKey`: `validator.name` serialized as a utf-8 encoded string.
  * The `storeValue` is the serialization of the object `validatorAddress` following `validatorAddressSchema` with `validatorAddress.address = validator.address`.

* Create three entries in the snapshot substore as:
  * The `storeKey` of each of the entries are `uint32be(0)`, `uint32be(1)`, and `uint32be(2)` respectively.
  * The `storeValue` is the same for the three entries and equal to the serialization of `genesisBlockAssetObject.snapshotSubstore`.

* Create an entry in the chain properties substore as specified above.

>   * The `storeValue` is the serialization of an object following `chainPropSchema` where all the properties are initialized to their default values. 

Reviewer: Above you sate about the `roundEndHeight`:
> Its initial value is set after the execution of the genesis block.

I think this should still be true and we should not assume that the genesis height is `0`. 

I would also remove the comment about the initialization that you have in the section above as it is redundant there.

Reviewer: Ah, now I see that this value is overwritten later. It is normally not good practice to initialize something in between with an incorrect value, even if it is not used. 

Maybe consider setting it directly to the final value or first to the genesis height and then doing
```
    chainProperties.roundEndHeight = chainProperties.roundEndHeight + len(snapshotStore(0).validators)
```
below.

Author: changed to the second suggestion

##### Genesis PoA Store Schema

```java
genesisPoAStoreSchema = {
   "type":"object",
   "required":[
      "validatorSubstore",
      "snapshotSubstore"
   ],
   "properties":{

>       "validatorSubstore":{

Reviewer 3: `validators` could be part of `genesisPoAStoreSchema` and we can remove `validatorsSubstore` as mentioned by @AndreasKendziorra

>       "validatorSubstore":{

Author: `validatorsSubstore` removed as suggested

               "type":"array",
               "fieldNumber":1,
               "items":{
                  "type":"object",
                  "required":[
                     "address",
                     "weight"
                  ],
                  "properties":{
                     "address":{
                        "dataType":"bytes",
                        "fieldNumber":1
                     },
                     "weight":{
                        "dataType":"uint64",
                        "fieldNumber":2
                     }
                  }
               }
            },
            "threshold":{
               "dataType":"uint64",
               "fieldNumber":2
            }
         },
         "required":[
            "activeValidators",
            "threshold"
         ]
      }
   }
}
```

#### Genesis State Finalization

To finalize the state of a genesis block `g`, the following logic is executed:

Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the bytes included in the block assets for the PoA module and let `genesisBlockAssetObject` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisPoAStoreSchema` schema, given below, then:

```python

> chainProperties.roundEndHeight = g.header.height + len(snapshotStore(0).addresses)

Reviewer 2: `snapshotStore(0).validators` instead of `snapshotStore(0).addresses`?

  * `storeKey`: `validator.address`.
  * The `storeValue` is the serialization of the object `validatorObject` following `validatorObjectSchema` with `validatorObject.name = validator.name`. 	

* Create an entry in the name substore for each entry `validator` in the `assetPoA.validators` array as:
  * `storeKey`: `validator.name` serialized as a utf-8 encoded string.
  * The `storeValue` is the serialization of the object `validatorAddress` following `validatorAddressSchema` with `validatorAddress.address = validator.address`.

* Create three entries in the snapshot substore as:
  * The `storeKey` of each of the entries are `uint32be(0)`, `uint32be(1)`, and `uint32be(2)` respectively.
  * The `storeValue` is the same for the three entries and equal to the serialization of `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore`.

* Create an entry in the chain properties substore as:
  * The `storeValue` is the serialization of a `chainProperties` object following `chainPropSchema` where:
    * `chainProperties.roundEndHeight` = `g.header.height`.
    * `chainProperties.validatorsUpdateNonce` = 0.

##### Genesis PoA Store Schema

> ```java

Reviewer: I would suggest to run `prettier` on the schema to improve the spacing.

Author: good point, done

genesisPoAStoreSchema = {
   "type":"object",
   "required":[
      "validators",
      "snapshotSubstore"
   ],
   "properties":{
      "validators":{
         "type":"array",
         "fieldNumber":1,
         "items":{
            "type":"object",
            "required":[
               "address",
               "name",
               "blsKey",
               "proofOfPossession",
               "generatorKey"
            ],
            "properties":{
               "name":{
                  "dataType":"string",
                  "fieldNumber":1
               },

>                "address":{

Reviewer: For me the `address` would be the primary identifier and I would therefore put that one first. Additionally, I would consider enforcing lexicographic order by address. This is not really required for the protocol, but I think it makes manual verification and also the programmatic verification (distinct addresses) easier.

Author: good point, I fixed the schema and added the extra condition.

Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the bytes included in the `data` property of a deserialized entry in the block assets for the PoA module and let `assetPoA` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisPoAStoreSchema` schema, then: 

* Checks for the `assetPoA.validators` (note that these checks are equivalent to those for the verification of the Authority Registration command): 
  * Check that the `address` properties of all entries in the `assetPoA.validators` array are pairwise distinct.
  * Check that the `name` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array contains only characters from the set `[a-z0-9!@$&_.]`, is not empty and is at most `MAX_LENGTH_NAME` characters long.
  * Check that the `name` property of all entries in the `assetPoA.validators` array are pairwise distinct. 
  * Check that the `generatorKey` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array has length 32.
  * Check that the `blsKey` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array has length 48.
  * Check that the `proofOfPossession` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array has length 96.

> * Checks for the `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore`: 

Reviewer: We do not check the number of entries of the array as for the authority update command.

Reviewer: Regarding the comment above.

>  I think in this case it is a bit dangerous to refer to that logic since for the update authority command verification the entries in the validator substore already exist and we do not need to check for uniqueness etc.

Also in the authority update command we check address uniqueness. I think all checks are the same or which one specifically is different?

Author: Yes, the checks are equivalent but the command one is against the existing state store and here it is against the content of another property in the assets data. That is why I would prefer not to just point out to those checks. I have added a similar explanatory sentence as I did for checks for the `assetPoA.validators` though.

Good point regarding the number of entries, added.

  * Check that the value of `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore.threshold` is within the following range:
     * Minimum value: ⌊ ⅓ × `totalWeight`⌋ + 1
     * Maximum value: `totalWeight`

    where ⌊⋅⌋ is the floor function.

* Create an entry in the validator substore for each entry `validator` in the `assetPoA.validators` array as:
  * `storeKey`: `validator.address`.
  * The `storeValue` is the serialization of the object `validatorObject` following `validatorObjectSchema` with `validatorObject.name = validator.name`. 	

* Create an entry in the name substore for each entry `validator` in the `assetPoA.validators` array as:
  * `storeKey`: `validator.name` serialized as a utf-8 encoded string.
  * The `storeValue` is the serialization of the object `validatorAddress` following `validatorAddressSchema` with `validatorAddress.address = validator.address`.

* Create three entries in the snapshot substore as:
  * The `storeKey` of each of the entries are `uint32be(0)`, `uint32be(1)`, and `uint32be(2)` respectively.
  * The `storeValue` is the same for the three entries and equal to the serialization of `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore`.

> * Create an entry in the chain properties substore as specified above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create an entry in the chain properties substore as specified beow.
```

Author: removed any location detail

To initialize the state of a genesis block `g`, the following logic is executed. If any step fails, the block is discarded and has no further effect.

> Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the bytes included in the `data` property of a deserialized entry in the block assets for the PoA module and let `assetPoA` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisPoAStoreSchema` schema, then: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the bytes included in the `data` property of a deserialized entry in the block assets for the PoA module and let `assetPoA` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisPoAStoreSchema` schema. Then: 
```

Reviewer 2: Just a suggestion as the sentence is very long.

Author: updated

* Checks for the `assetPoA.validators` (note that these checks are equivalent to those for the verification of the Authority Registration command): 
  * Check that the `address` properties of all entries in the `assetPoA.validators` array are pairwise distinct.
  * Check that the `name` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array contains only characters from the set `[a-z0-9!@$&_.]`, is not empty and is at most `MAX_LENGTH_NAME` characters long.
  * Check that the `name` property of all entries in the `assetPoA.validators` array are pairwise distinct. 
  * Check that the `generatorKey` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array has length 32.
  * Check that the `blsKey` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array has length 48.
  * Check that the `proofOfPossession` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array has length 96.

* Checks for the `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore`: 

>   * Check that the `address` properties of entries in the `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore.activeValidators` are pairwise distinct.

Author: I fixed it by adding `where ⌊⋅⌋ is the floor function.` in the same line it is mentioned

  * Check that entries in the `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore.activeValidators` array are ordered lexicographically according to `address`.

>   * Check that for every element `activeValidator` in the `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore.activeValidators` array, there is an entry with `address == activeValidator.address` in the `assetPoA.validators` array.

Author: maybe I am missing something but I added the pairwise distinct condition above in this set of checks.

>   * Check that for every element `activeValidator` in the `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore.activeValidators` array, there is an entry with `address == activeValidator.address` in the `assetPoA.validators` array.

Reviewer 2: I meant the suggestion created by the "suggestion" feature :) That means, rewriting this line to:

...there is an entry `validator` in the `genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators` array with `validator.address == activeValidator.address`.

>   * Check that for every element `activeValidator` in the `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore.activeValidators` array, there is an entry with `address == activeValidator.address` in the `assetPoA.validators` array.

Author: Now it is all clear, changed as suggested, thanks.

P.D: linking old suggestions doesn't seem to work

  * Check that the `blsKey` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array has length 48.
  * Check that the `proofOfPossession` property of every entry in the `assetPoA.validators` array has length 96.

> * Checks for the `assetPoA.snapshotSubstore` (note that these checks are equivalent to those for the verification of the Authority Update command): 

Reviewer 2: I know that you added the statement about the equivalence based on a comment from Jan. But I think it is misleading as it is not to 100% equivalent as you pointed out. Maybe "similar", "almost identical" or "almost equivalent". Or you could just drop it.

Author: changed to "similar"

#### Genesis State Finalization

To finalize the state of a genesis block `g`, the following logic is executed.  If any step fails, the block is discarded and has no further effect.

> Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the bytes included in the `data` property of a deserialized entry in the block assets for the PoA module and let `assetPoA` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisPoAStoreSchema` schema, then:

Author: updated here and above

BFTThreshold = snapshotStore(0).threshold

> setBFTParameters(BFTThreshold, BFTThreshold, snapshotStore(0).validators)

Reviewer 2: should't we abort the block execution if this function fails?

Reviewer: Note that in this LIP we sometimes use `BFTThreshold` and sometimes `BFT_THRESHOLD`. As this is a variable and not a constant, I would suggest to switch to camelCase, e.g., `bftThreshold`.

Author: fixed variable names as jan suggested.
Regarding Andreas question, I think that is already addressed in line 644

Reviewer 2: hm. I see 4 different cases where `[setBFTParameters](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/c308e37920b31104da3f4ebd3eaebfdd8590a12f/proposals/lip-introduce_bft_module.md#execution-12)`, and already for the first I don't see clearly this will never happen. In particular, I do not see how line 644 prevents this.

Reviewer: From my side the comment can be resolved.

Author: It does not prevent that if fails, what it says is that if `setBFTParameters` (for whatever the reason) fails, then the processing of this block halts and it is discarded.

It is up to the sidechain dev to set the right values for the BFT parameters so that this function does not fail.

Reviewer 2: ok, I see that it is logically correct. But I think it's hard to get the logic from reading it. One reason is that it's not obvious at all that a setter function can fail. The second reason is now the inconsistency between calling `setBFTParameters` and calling `registerValidatorKeys`. For the latter one, the outcome of the call is explicitly used in the pseudo code. For the former one not. And it had to be done for `registerValidatorKeys` because "failing" is not well defined for this function.

# Pass the BLS keys and generator keys to the Validators module
for every validator element in genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators:

>     registerValidatorKeys(validator.address, validator.proofOfPossession, validator.generatorKey, validator.blsKey)

Reviewer 2: The return value should be checked, and block execution cancelled if the the return value is not `True`.

Reviewer 2: I think like this it is still not very clear as line 648 is just a comparison statement. But it's not clear that something fails here if `registerValidatorKeys` returns `False`. I would propose something like:

``` 
for every validator element in genesisBlockAssetObject.validatorSubstore.validators:
    if registerValidatorKeys(validator.address, validator.proofOfPossession, validator.generatorKey, validator.blsKey) != True:
        discard the block 
```

Maybe this functions becomes easier to understand if the logic is put into a function that returns True or False, and in the introduction you saysthat the block is discarded if the function returns `False`.

Author: I think it is already clear that if this function does not return true, the processing must stop. 

Anyway, I went for your first suggestion here

# Pass the list of validators to the Validators module
for i in range(len(snapshotStore(0).validators)):

>     addresses = snapshotStore(0).address[i]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    addresses = snapshotStore(0).validators[i].address
```

Reviewer 2: the same for line 691

Reviewer: Note that we also always overwrite the value `addresses`, but we actually want to append it to a list, right?

Reviewer 2: can be resolved

Reviewer: can be resolved

setGeneratorList(addresses)
```
where:

* `registerValidatorKeys` is defined in the [Validators module][research:validators-module#register-validator-keys].
* `setBFTParameters` is a function exposed by the [BFT module][research:bft_module].
* `setGeneratorList`is a function exposed by the [Validators module][research:validators-module].

### Block Processing

The following steps are executed as part of the block processing, see the [LIP 0055][lip-0055] for details.

#### After Transactions Execution

After the transactions in a block `b` are executed, the following logic is executed:

> ```python

Reviewer: I think also after the pseudocode below we should list all functions that are used from other modules there. Currently, `setGeneratorList` does not appear in the list. In general, I would find it easier to once define the notation `moduleName.fct` and mention that in this LIP you call functions from the BFT, Random and Validator module. Then it the notation like `validatorsModule.setGeneratorList` or `Validators.setGeneratorList` makes it directly clear that this is not a local function defined in this LIP but an API.

Reviewer: Can be resolved.

[lip-0038]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/master/proposals/lip-0038.md
[lip-0038#public-key-registration]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/master/proposals/lip-0038.md#public-key-registration-and-proof-of-possession
[research:bft_module]: https://research.lisk.com/t/introduce-bft-module/321

> [research:random-module]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0046.md

Author: done

> [research:validators-module]: https://research.lisk.com/t/introduce-validators-module/317

Reviewer 2: again: could we update the links from the research forum to the LIPs repo for all published LIPs? :)

Author: true, I thought I did it already
